ISO20022 Ecosystem Research and Technical Design (#2221)
w3f/Grants-Program: applications/ISO20022-Implementation-POC.md

    - https://github.com/encointer/kilt-personhood (Main author)
- Contributions to encointer js
    - https://github.com/encointer/encointer-js/pull/78

Piero has previously received a W3F grant for a different project(see above).

### Team Code Repos

- https://github.com/pifragile
- https://github.com/SolidbitGmbH

Please also provide the GitHub accounts of all team members. If they contain no activity, references to projects hosted elsewhere or live are also fine.

- https://github.com/pifragile

### Team LinkedIn Profiles

- https://www.linkedin.com/in/piero-guicciardi-66b939152/

## Development Status :open_book:
This project has not started yet, but there has been some previous related work in the ecosystem (see references), which we studied and will build upon.

## Development Roadmap :nut_and_bolt:

### Overview

- **Estimated duration:** 1 month
- **FTE:**  0.25 (5 person days)
- **Total Costs:** 5200 CHF (5850 USD)

### Milestone 1 — Ecosystem Research and Technical Design

- **Estimated duration:** 1 month
- **FTE:**  0.25 (5 person days)
- **Costs:** 5200 CHF (5850 USD)

| Number | Deliverable | Specification |

> | -----: | ----------- | ------------- |
> | 0e. | Article | We will publish an **article** that outlines the current state of other blockchain's ISO20022 development as well as technical designs how to solve this for Polkadot.|

Reviewer: Thanks for the update, @pifragile. Happy to move forward. Just to give the article a bit of structure, I would like to ask that a bibliography and description of how the material was sourced be included. Can be part of the article.

```suggestion
| -----: | ----------- | ------------- |
| **0c.** | Methodology | Description of how the information was sourced. |
| **0e.** | Bibliography | List of sources |
| 1. | Article | We will publish an **article** that outlines the current state of other blockchain's ISO20022 development as well as technical designs how to solve this for Polkadot.|
```

Author: sure, makes sense!

### Project Details

The goal of this project will be to implement a fully functional minimal viable product (MVP) that lets banks settle payments on the Polkadot blockchain using the ISO20022 standard. We will focus on customer-to-customer interbank payments and payment reversals, ie. Customer C1 with a bank account at bank B1 sending an amount of DOT to customer C2 with an account at bank B2 using ISO20022 messages.

#### MVP Components
This MVP will consist of the following components:

##### 1. Substrate Pallet

> The first component is a pallet that will be resopnsible for storing hashed ISO20022 messages and handeling interbank payment settlements as well as a payment reversal mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first component is a pallet that will be responsible for storing hashed ISO20022 messages and handling interbank payment settlements as well as a payment reversal mechanism.
```

2. **Transaction management:** Banks can submit a hashed (and salted) ISO20022 message along with the receiving bank account and DOT amount to the pallet in order to transfer a certain amount of DOT to the receiving bank.
3. **Payment reversal mechanism:** Banks will be able to revert payments in order to be compliant with ISO20022 messages such as pain.007.001.11 (CustomerPaymentReversalV11) or pacs.007.001.12 (FIToFIPaymentReversalV12).

##### 2. Client for Banks
In order for banks to use Polkadot as a payment settlement system, they will need to run a client which offers the following funcionality:

1. API to receive customer payment instructions
2. ISO20022 message parser/creator
3. Send extrinsics to pallet for transfer
4. Send extrinsic to pallet for reversal
5. Send/Read ISO messages to bus
6. Verify relevant ISO messages on chain
7. Client account management system
    - Create for each client an account number
    - Store for each client a list of hashes form the chain
    - Functionality to derive client balance from onchain hashes
8. Hashmap-like storage of all ISO messages and salts

> We will use NodeJs to build this MVP client.

Reviewer 2: Would you be open to a Java or C#-implementation? Personally, I'd prefer to develop on Node as as well, but I know that banks (at least in Switzerland) are usually quite hesitant to adopt Node and their devs mostly deal with C# and Java. Also, they tend to be more stable when compared to Node w.r.t. potential dependencies, although that can be mitigated by not using any npm dependencies (but that's a quite strong limitation which makes it suitable only for a minority of use cases).

Author: I understand, yes I would be open for that.

##### 3. Interbank Message Bus

> As the blockchain only stores hashes of the ISO 20022 messages in order to preserve privacy, we need some a  communication system to exchange ISO20022 messages between banks.

Reviewer 2: So the blockchain only stores hashes of the pacs.008.001.11 messages, but the banks send each other the pacs.008.001.11 messages without hashing them peer-to-peer, did I understand correctly?

Author: Yes, that's correct.

#### Payment Flow
The below diagram describes the steps necessary to complete an ISO20022 payment using the Substrate pallet as the settlement system. Customer1 with a bank account at Bank1 is sending DOT to Customer2 with an account at bank Bank2. In this example we use two ISO20022 messages (for an example please see the appendix):
1. pain.001.001.11 (CustomerCreditTransferInitiationV11) for the customer to initiate the payment.
2. pacs.008.001.11 (FIToFICustomerCreditTransferV11) for the interbank transfer.

![Payment Flow](https://solid-bit.com/w3f/iso20022.png "Payment Flow")

#### Design Choices

1. We do not process ISO20022 messages onchain in order to preserve privacy.
2. We do not use offchain-workers for message processing also for privacy reasons.
3. We do not create customer accounts on chain, because they could easily be linked to a real person, again breaking privacy.
4. We do not use one centralized message processing institution, as we want to give each bank full access to their on-chain funds, at least guaranteeing decentralization on the interbank level.

### Ecosystem Fit

> Many competing blockchain ecosystems are already ISO20022 compliant (see above). If Polkadot as well wants to become compatible with the traditional finance industry, an ISO20022 integration will be the right place to start.

Reviewer: Can you give some examples which blockchains are ISO20022 compatible and how they achieved that?

Author: Blockchains that claim to be ISO20022 compliant are for example Ripple and Cardano. How they actually achieve this is pretty vague in my eyes. For example Ripple writes in their [ISO20022 one pager](https://ripple.com/lp/iso-overview/):

"To help enable this next step in global interoperability and meet the evolving needs of our customers, Ripple is now part of the ISO 20022 Standards Body-the first member focused on Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT)."

What this means on a technical level does not seem very transparent. The way I see it, it is not even totally clear what it means for a blockchain to be ISO20022 compliant, as ISO20022 is a messaging protocol intended to simplify and standardize communication about financial transactions  between trusted entities.

So, I see this proposal as an experiment to bring more clarity to this question by building an ISO20022 integration that is simple and sound and can be used and tested in practice.

| **0d.** | Docker | We will provide a Dockerfile that can be used to test all the functionality delivered with this milestone. |
| 0e. | Article | We will publish an **article** that descibes the functionality of the pallet, bank client and message bus.|
| 1. |  Bank client | We will implement the bank client that interacts with the Substrate Chain as well as with other banks as specified above.|
| 2. |  Interbank Message Bus | We will implement the interbank message bus as described above.|
| 3. |  Integration Tests | Connect all parts using a running Substrate blockchain, a message bus and two customers with accounts at two banks, creating transactions and transaction reversals.|

## Future Plans

There are many ways in which this project can be extended in the future. Some of them are:

### Protocol
1. Allow for multiple currencies on the Polkadot Asset Hub
2. Give customers direct access to their onchain funds
3. Process a wider variety of ISO20022 transactions like card payments, currency conversions or even securities trading
4. Make bank client PCI SSC compliant

### Adoption

> 1. Create partnerships with banks for pilot phase

Reviewer 2: I see you're incorporated in Switzerland. Is that your target market? Do you have contacts in banks, and if yes, which ones would you target? If you're not confident sharing it here, you can also send us an email at grants AT web3 DOT foundation or schedule a call [here](https://calendar.app.google/puH98UkrfgEd66Ki9).

Author: Yes, swiss banks would be a natural place to start. Let's speak more in a call, just booked one.
